**
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
(SIRENS)
**
WOMAN:
BELLO MARTINEZ, TEODORO.
NARRATOR:
EVERY YEAR OVER 17,000 MIGRANT
WORKERS COME TO CANADA,
MANY TO THE TOWN OF LEAMINGTON,
ONTARIO.
ONCE KNOWN JUST AS THE TOMATO
CAPITAL OF THE NATION,
LEAMINGTON IS NOW
THE GREENHOUSE CAPITAL,
PRODUCING OVER A QUARTER
OF A BILLION POUNDS
OF TOMATOES EACH YEAR.
THE MEXICANS DO MOST
OF THE PHYSICAL WORK,
MANY RETURNING YEAR AFTER YEAR.
EIGHT MONTHS HERE;
FOUR MONTHS HOME.
(OVERLAPPING CHATTER)
NARRATOR:
TEODORO WORKS AT CAPITAL FARMS.
HE'S BEEN COMING TO CANADA
FOR SEVEN YEARS.
DENTON HOFFMAN:
LEAMINGTON IS THE MOST
CONCENTRATED AREA
OF GREENHOUSE PRODUCTION FOR
VEGETABLES IN NORTH AMERICA,
RIGHT HERE.
WHEN THE SATELLITES FLY
OVER HERE,
THEY CAN SEE REFLECTIONS
FROM ALL THE GREENHOUSES.
THIS IS,
THIS IS REALLY BIG BUSINESS.
WE NEED WORKERS
IN OUR GREENHOUSE.
WE'VE GOT 1200 ACRES
AROUND HERE
AND WE NEED AT LEAST
TWO OR THREE WORKERS PER ACRE.
WE CAN'T GET THOSE WORKERS
FROM THE STREETS OF LEAMINGTON.
YOU SEE THAT THE CONCENTRATION
OF GREENHOUSE
HAS PROVIDED US
WITH SOME CHALLENGES.
ONE IS TO FIND
ADEQUATE WORKERS.
GIRL:
ADAM! AHH!
BOY:
I AM INVINCIBLE!
FAUSTO:
HERE, YOU WANT A GINGER ALE?
NARRATOR:
THERE'S MONEY IN GREENHOUSES
AND THE INDUSTRY IS BOOMING.
YOU KNOW, IF A FATHER
HAD A GREENHOUSE,
THEN, YOU KNOW, HIS SONS BUILD
ANOTHER GREENHOUSE
AND THEIR SONS
BUILD A GREENHOUSE.
NARRATOR:
FAUSTO AMICONE'S FATHER FARMED
ONE ACRE.
NOW, AMCO HAS 47 ACRES,
ONE OF THE BIGGEST GREENHOUSES
IN LEAMINGTON,
WITH MORE THAN A 100 MEXICAN
WORKERS.
FAUSTO:
WE'RE GETTING BEHIND
HERE EH?
YOU GOT FOUR PEOPLE
CLIPPING NOW?
SEE LIKE THIS ONE HERE.
EVEN IF THEY WANT TO WORK
TO SEVEN TODAY GABE,
GET CAUGHT UP.
(BUZZER)
NARRATOR:
UNDER THE CONTRACT,
THE MEXICANS WORK SEVEN DAYS
A WEEK.
TEN HOURS A DAY AND MORE,
FOR A FLAT RATE
OF $7.25 AN HOUR.
MARGARET INGRATTA:
I THINK INITIALLY YOU HAD
TO HAVE 60% LOCAL LABOUR
AND 40% OFFSHORE LABOUR.
THAT'S THE WAY THEY USED
TO SET IT UP BEFORE.
BUT AS THE LOCAL LABOUR
GOT SCARCER AND SCARCER,
EVENTUALLY IT BECAME THAT 100%
OF THE WORKERS
IN THE GREENHOUSES
WERE MEXICAN OFFSHORE.
THEY HAD GREAT SUCCESS
RIGHT FROM THE BEGINNING
AND THAT'S WHY IT CONTINUED
AND MY DAD WAS ABLE TO EXPAND
HIS OPERATION AS WELL.
ONCE YOU REALIZED YOU DID NOT
HAVE TO DO ALL THE WORK
THEN YOU COULD GET BIGGER.
THE REASON SOME OF THE ONES
MAY NOT COME BACK...
WELL, THE ONES
THAT DON'T WORK OUT,
USUALLY THEY BECOME HOMESICK
RIGHT IN THE FIRST YEAR
AND THEY WANT TO GO BACK.
THEY COME IN MAY
AND THEY WANT TO GO BACK
ALREADY IN AUGUST.
AND THEN THEY DON'T REJOIN
THE PROGRAM.
BUT IF THEY STAY
AND THEY COME BACK
AFTER A COUPLE OF YEARS,
THEN IT BECOMES ROUTINE
FOR THEM.
NARRATOR:
UNDER THE CONTRACT,
GROWERS PROVIDE HOUSING.
TEODORO LIVES ON ONE FLOOR
OF A CORNER HOUSE
WITH NINE OTHER MEN
WHO WORK AT THE SAME
SMALL GREENHOUSE.
NARRATOR:
FOR THE NEXT EIGHT MONTHS,
THEY WILL WORK AND LIVE
IN CLOSE QUARTERS.
(BELLS RINGING)
PRIEST:
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
NARRATOR:
THEY'RE WANTED AS LABOURERS,
NOT CITIZENS.
THE PROGRAM ONLY ACCEPTS MEN
WHO ARE MARRIED
WITH LESS THAN
A GRADE SCHOOL EDUCATION
AND WITH STRONG TIES
TO FAMILIES AT HOME;
MEN WHO WILL GO BACK
AFTER MONTHS
OF PAINFUL SEPARATION.
(SOMEONE CALLS OUT AN ORDER)
SCOTT BRADT:
I HAVE TO SAY WHEN I FIRST
BOUGHT THE PLACE,
I SAID,
WHEN ARE YOU THE BUSIEST?
BECAUSE I WANTED TO KNOW
HOW THE BUSINESS WAS,
AND HE SAID,
"COME SEE ME FRIDAY NIGHT
AT ABOUT 6:00 P.M."
AND I DID,
AND I WAS SURPRISED UH,
HOW MANY MEXICANS WERE HERE
AND HOW MANY CAME AND...
IT WAS AMAZING.
IT WAS JUST AMAZING TO,
TO BE ABLE TO DO
3 OR 400 CUSTOMERS IN A COUPLE
HOUR PERIOD, YOU KNOW?
THANK YOU.
SCOTT BRADT:
IT BRINGS A LOT OF MONEY
TO THE AREA,
YOU KNOW, THE LEAMINGTON AREA.
I MEAN, SOME PEOPLE I THINK
COMPLAIN BUT FOR ME UH, I...
I'M HAPPY.
OTHER BUSINESSES IN TOWN
I KNOW THEY COMPLAIN THAT
ON FRIDAY NIGHTS
MAYBE THERE'S TOO MUCH
COMMOTION DOWNTOWN
OR THEY, THEY UM...
WELL, IF YOU WERE
A PERSON FROM THIS TOWN
AND YOU CAME IN MY STORE
ON A FRIDAY NIGHT,
A LOT OF PEOPLE WOULD LEAVE.
GABE MANCINI:
NOT TO SAY THEY'VE TAKEN OVER
BUT HEY,
THERE'S A BIG CHUNK OF THESE
GUYS AROUND.
I KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE REALLY, REALLY
UNCOMFORTABLE ABOUT IT,
LIKE, THEY'RE LIKE,
"OH MY GOD,
THEY'RE ALL OVER THE PLACE."
YOU KNOW?
I MEAN, THEY'RE HUMAN BEINGS
BUT IT'S...
WHEN YOU'RE NOT USED
TO SOMETHING
IT'S LIKE WALKING INTO MEXICO
THEY SAY,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
NOT TO BE PREJUDICED
OR ANYTHING,
BUT I MEAN, THAT'S,
THAT'S WHAT IT IS.
MARGARET INGRATTA:
FOR ME, WHO UNDERSTANDS
THEIR VALUE,
I DON'T THINK ANYTHING.
I THINK, YEAH WHATEVER.
AND THE TOWN GOES OUT
OF ITS WAY TO ACCOMMODATE.
UM...
YOU KNOW OCCASIONALLY
THERE'LL BE SOME
THAT ARE MAYBE INEBRIATED
AND THE POLICEMEN JUST KIND OF
CALL THEIR OWNERS
AND ASK THEM TO COME
AND PICK THEM UP AND...
AND THAT KIND OF THING.
STOMPIN' TOM CONNORS:
THERE WAS A GUY FROM P.E.I.
THEY USED TO CALL POTATO,
HE MET THIS YOUNG LEAMINGTON
ONTARIO TOMATO
BUT HE HAD EYES
FOR OTHER GIRLS
AND SHE WAS
A LITTLE MUSHY...
ANNOUNCER:
ALL RIGHT HERE WE GO!
FIVE, FOUR, THREE, TWO, ONE,
STOMP!
COME ON, GO, GO, GO!
DON'T BE AFRAID!
MOVE THOSE FEET!
NARRATOR:
ACCIDENTS IN THE AGRICULTURAL
INDUSTRY ARE COMMON.
THERE ARE NO SAFETY
OR HEALTH LAWS
THAT COVER
ONTARIO FARM WORKERS.
THERE ARE NO REGULATIONS
THAT COVER THE USE
OF PESTICIDES.
THERE IS NO MANDATORY
SAFETY TRAINING.
NARRATOR:
MARCOS GASCA NAVARRO
WAS WORKING AT MASTRON FARMS
WHEN HE HAD PESTICIDE
ACCIDENTALLY SPRAYED
IN HIS LEFT EYE.
NARRATOR:
THE TOXIN BURNED HIS CORNEA.
IF HE'D GOTTEN
TO A DOCTOR QUICKLY,
HE MIGHT HAVE SAVED IT.
INSTEAD, HE LOST 80 PERCENT
OF THE VISION IN HIS EYE.
FARM WORK IS DANGEROUS
AND THERE ARE OTHER COMPLAINTS.
THE WORKERS PAY TAXES
BUT GET FEW SERVICES;
PAY EMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
PREMIUMS,
BUT DON'T GET MANY BENEFITS.
FARM UNIONS ARE ILLEGAL
IN ONTARIO
BUT SOME ORGANIZERS HAVE OPENED
A MIGRANT WORKERS'
SUPPORT CENTRE.
STAN:
WITH THE MIGRANT FARM WORKER
WHAT HAPPENS IS,
THEY ARE BROUGHT HERE,
THEY ARE PRETTY MUCH ISOLATED
ON A GROWER OR FARMER'S
PROPERTY
AND HAVE VERY LITTLE ACCESS
TO AGENCIES
OR OUTSIDE INDIVIDUALS
WHO CAN ASSIST THEM.
WHEN THEY MAKE COMPLAINTS
ABOUT THEIR HOUSING,
WORKING CONDITIONS,
AN ABUSIVE EMPLOYER,
THEY ONLY HAVE
A COUPLE OF OPTIONS.
ONE IS TO GO TO THE EMPLOYER
WHO'S CAUSING THE PROBLEM
TO BEGIN WITH,
THE SECOND IS THE MEXICAN
CONSULATE,
AND WHAT WE'VE FOUND
IS THAT THE CONSULATE
IS THERE TO PROTECT
THE CONTRACT WITH THE GROWER,
AND PROVIDES VERY LITTLE
SERVICE
TO THE INDIVIDUAL WORKER.
IF THERE IS A PROBLEM
THEY'RE USUALLY ON
THE NEXT PLANE BACK.
EVELYN ENCLADA GREZ:
A WORKER CAME IN SAYING
THAT HE WAS
QUITE AFRAID OF GOING
BACK TO WORK
BECAUSE HE HAD WITNESSED
A CO-WORKER OF HIS
BEING STRANGLED
BY HIS SUPERVISOR
AND THEN THAT'S WHEN
HE GOT REALLY UPSET
AND HE INTERVENED
AND PUSHED
THE SUPERVISOR AWAY.
THE SUPERVISOR WAS SAYING
THINGS LIKE UH,
BEFORE-
BEFORE YOU MEXICO...
NOBODY WANTS TO WORK
IN THAT TYPE OF ENVIRONMENT,
SO WE DECIDED
TO INFORM THE CONSULATE
ABOUT WHAT HAD HAPPENED
AND THE CONSULATE
WANTED TO TALK TO THE WORKERS
AND THE SUPERVISOR.
NARRATOR:
A DELEGATION
FROM THE MEXICAN CONSULATE
ARRIVES AT TEODORO'S FARM
TO HEAR THE WORKERS'
COMPLAINTS.
THE OWNER OF CAPITAL FARMS
IS NOT PLEASED
TO SEE THE FILM CREW.
OWNER:
WELL, I'LL BE HONEST WITH YOU,
I DON'T WANT
A CAMERA CREW HERE.
I BELIEVE YOU CALLED ME
A WEEK OR TWO AGO
AND I TOLD YOU THE SAME THING.
WOMAN:
RIGHT, THAT WAS A DIFFERENT
SITUATION...
I'M GOING TO BE VERY SENSITIVE
AND RESPECT YOUR BUSINESS...
OWNER:
WELL, IF YOU'D RESPECT
MY BUSINESS,
YOU'D SHUT THE CAMERA OFF.
NARRATOR:
AFTER MANY HOURS,
TEODORO'S BOSS ALLOWED THE CREW
TO FILM THIS MEETING BETWEEN
THE CONSULATE AND THE WORKERS.
NARRATOR:
THE SUPERVISOR STAYED
ON THE FARM
AND THE WORKERS WERE DRIVEN
BACK TO THE HOUSE.
THE CAMERAS WERE NEVER ALLOWED
TO TEODORO'S FARM AGAIN.
NARRATOR:
SOON AFTER THE PROBLEM
WITH TEODORO'S FOREMAN
AND HIS CO-WORKER,
THE LABOUR CENTRE STAFF MEETS
WITH THE CONSULAR OFFICIALS.
STAN:
WORKERS IN LEAMINGTON
NOW HAVE A CENTRE
THAT THEY CAN COME TO AND VISIT
AND IF THEY HAVE PROBLEMS
OR CONCERNS CAN,
WE CAN TRY AND HELP THEM.
BUT I THINK THE WORKERS
UNDERSTAND
THAT WE ARE FOR THEM HERE,
RIGHT, TO HELP THEM.
CONSUL GENERAL:
AND WE HAVE A RESP-
A LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY
TO TAKE CARE OF THE WORKER.
WOMAN:
I THINK THERE IS A LOT
OF MISCOMMUNICATION
BETWEEN THE WORKERS
AND THE CONSULATE.
CONSUL GENERAL:
I WOULD QUALIFY THIS BUSINESS
OF THE LACK OF COMM-
OF THE MISCOMMUNICATION
STRONGLY BECAUSE IT'S,
I, WE, OUR PERCEPTION
IS DIFFERENT.
I DON'T SAY YOU ARE
RIGHT OR WRONG,
I SAY WE HAVE A DIFFERENT
PERCEPTION
AND THAT'S THE WAY WE,
WE'LL TALK.
STAN:
THERE HAS BEEN A NUMBER
OF ISSUES AROUND POOR HOUSING,
VIOLENT EMPLOYERS,
ABUSIVE EMPLOYERS-
OH NO, NO, NO. NO, NO.
STAN:
AND, AND THOSE EMPLOYERS
CONTINUED TO HAVE WORKERS
WORKING ON-
OH NO.
NO WHEN,
WHEN WE KNOW ABOUT IT,
NO WE COME TO THE DEFENSE
OF THE WORKERS
IN A VERY, VERY, FORCEFUL WAY.
OKAY, WE HAVE TO LEAVE SOON
BECAUSE WE ARE,
A LITTLE LATER
WE HAVE TO VISIT SOME FARMS
AND WE HOPE TO ARRIVE
TO TORONTO BEFORE MIDNIGHT.
I'M NOT AN INHUMANE...
STAN:
NO, I, I'M NOT SAYING
THAT YOU ARE.
(LAUGHTER)
(BUZZER RINGS)
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
NARRATOR:
THE PROBLEM AT TEODORO'S
WORKPLACE IS GETTING WORSE.
THE DIPLOMAT'S VISIT
DID NOTHING TO COOL DOWN
THE FOREMAN
AND THERE ARE STILL MONTHS
TO GO ON THE CONTRACT.
THE TENSION PERMEATES
THE HOUSE.
NARRATOR:
TEODORO SETS UP A MEETING WITH
AN ADVOCATE FROM THE CENTRE
TO TALK ABOUT THE PROBLEMS
AT WORK.
MAN:
FIRST OFF LEAMINGTON,
HAPPY CANADA DAY!
(CHEERS AND CLAPPING)
MARIO EPEREZ:
UH, A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE VERY IGNORANT
AND THEY JUST CALL THEM STUPID.
YOU KNOW THEY,
THEY TRY TO SEE THESE PEOPLE
AS THE LOWEST THING IN THE,
IN THE WORLD, YOU KNOW?
THEY DON'T REALIZE THAT
THEY PAY TAXES TOO AND THEY,
THEIR TAXES PAY FOR A LOT
OF WELFARE PEOPLE, YOU KNOW?
LIKE THESE GUYS GO OUT
SATURDAY NIGHTS.
THEY HAVE THEIR MEXICAN BAR.
A COUPLE OF GUYS TOLD ME
A STORY THAT UH,
ONE WAS SITTING IN A BAR
AND OUT OF NO WHERE THIS GUY
HE CAME AND HE KICKED HIM.
ANOTHER GUY,
HE WAS WALKING BY HIMSELF,
THREE GUYS JUMPED HIM.
YOU'LL BE SEEING SOMEBODY
RIDING A BIKE,
THEY'LL JUST KNOCK HIM OFF
THE BIKE AND STEAL THEIR BIKE.
OF COURSE IT MAKES ME FEEL SAD
BUT YOU KNOW,
LIKE WE CAN'T DO NOTHING
ABOUT IT.
(SINGING A HYMN)
NARRATOR:
TEODORO'S SUPERVISOR
IS TARGETING HIM,
MAKING WORK AND LIFE DIFFICULT.
TEODORO BORROWS A VAN
TO SEE IF HE CAN ARRANGE
A TRANSFER TO ANOTHER FARM.
NARRATOR:
HE CAN'T AFFORD THAT,
AND IN ANY CASE,
A MIGRANT WORKER
CAN'T CHANGE FARMS
WITHOUT BOTH GROWERS'
PERMISSION.
TEODORO AND THE OTHERS
WILL STAY WHERE THEY ARE
FOR THE REST OF THE CONTRACT.
OPERATOR'S VOICE:
THE MAXIMUM TIME FOR YOUR CALL
IS 37 MINUTES.
(SINGING)
(SINGING TOGETHER)
LAST WEEKEND WE HAD
A PROBLEM WHERE
FOUR GUYS GOT,
GOT REALLY DRUNK.
UM, THEY CAME BACK AROUND
4:00 OR 5:00 IN THE MORNING.
THEY CAUSED A LITTLE BIT
OF TROUBLE HERE.
THEY DID A LITTLE BIT
OF DAMAGE AND...
BASICALLY I KNOW,
I KNOW THAT THEY'RE HUMANS
AND THEY'RE GOING
TO DO THIS, BUT...
LIKE, WHERE DO YOU,
WHERE DO YOU DRAW
THE LINE, YOU KNOW?
WHEN THIS INDUSTRY
WAS SMALLER BACK THEN,
WHEN THERE WASN'T AS MANY GUYS,
I THINK THE GUYS WERE MORE
TIMID OF THEIR EMPLOYERS.
NOW THEY'RE MORE FREE,
I THINK.
BEFORE IT WAS LIKE, HEY,
YOU KNOW, WE'RE HERE TO WORK.
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
NARRATOR:
THE CONSUL GENERAL'S VISIT
TO LEAMINGTON IS NOT WASTED.
HE MEETS WITH GROWERS
TO DISCUSS INVESTMENT OPTIONS
IN MEXICO.
DENTON HOFFMAN:
TO THINK, THIS IS THE
GREENHOUSE CAPITAL OF,
CERTAINLY NORTH AMERICA.
MAN:
YEAH, DEFINITELY.
AND IT IS,
AND IT IS.
AND WE HAVE SOME FAIRLY
SERIOUS LINKS WITH MEXICO
AND AS YOU KNOW WE HAVE A LOT
OF MEXICAN WORKERS HERE SO,
WE NEED THE SUPPORT
AND THE LINKAGE.
WELL THAT'S WHAT
GLOBALIZATION'S ALL ABOUT.
DENTON HOFFMAN:
IF YOU REALLY LOOK AT THIS
FROM THE MEXICAN PERSPECTIVE,
THEY, THEY REALLY,
DON'T DO TOO BADLY.
I SUSPECT EVEN THOUGH WE'D LIKE
TO THINK WE'RE PERFECT,
WE'RE NOT.
BUT WE'RE GETTING THERE.
**
ADAM:
LEAVE A MESSAGE AFTER THE TONE.
OPERATOR'S VOICE:
TO ENTER A TELEPHONE NUMBER
WHERE YOU CAN BE REACHED,
PRESS ONE.
PLEASE LEAVE YOUR MESSAGE
AFTER THE TONE. (BEEP).
HELLO ADAM, I'M CALLING
ON BEHALF OF FIVE-
OF THE FIVE WORKERS THAT
ARE REMAINING HERE IN CANADA
AND UH, THEY'RE REALLY
CONCERNED ABOUT UH,
HOW THEY'RE GOING TO LEAVE
TONIGHT.
THEY ARE ALSO OF COURSE VERY
WORRIED ABOUT THEIR CHEQUE
THAT IS PENDING, AND UM,
I'VE BEEN TRYING TO GET-
WE'VE BEEN TRYING TO GET A HOLD
OF YOU SINCE THIS WEEKEND
WITHOUT MUCH SUCCESS.
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
GIRL:
THAT'S $80.44.
FLIGHT ATTENDANT:
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
WE ARE IN OUR FINAL APPROACH
INTO MEXICO CITY.
(SPEAKING SPANISH)
**
(LAUGHING)
(PIGS SNORT, BIRDS SING)
(SPEAKING SPANISH)